Hello everybody. Welcome back to another episode of Ruby for all. Julie, what is up?
It was 35 degrees outside today and I could not take my kids on a walk to school because
it was too cold.
I told you before the show started, it's a little chilly here too. But when I say chilly
here, I mean like 60 degrees, but that's still chilly for me. But I was like, get out of
bed. It's cold.
Wait, so was it 60 degrees in your house or outside?
Outside. It's 60 right now. This morning it was in the 50s. Would you rather be cold or
hot?
I would definitely hands down want it to be spring and summer now.
Yep. That's why I like Arizona because it's already almost spring. I don't know what this
random cold front is, but it was really nice before it came through and I'm ready for it.
60 degrees can mean very differently for like shade and the sun shining down. Like if it's
sunny and there's no wind and it's 65, I can deal with that. But I especially struggle with
what I'm supposed to wear when it's 65 because am I going to be standing in the sun or am
I going to be standing in the shade? Is it going to be windy? I don't know how windy
wind is.
Yeah. I am the master of layers because I'm always cold. And when I used to live in North
Carolina, it would be like 30 in the morning and like 70 in the afternoon. And so I would
biking to class and stuff or skateboarding to class and it's like, Oh my God, I'm freezing.
I can't feel my hands. I can't feel my face. There's snot running down my face. And later
that day I'm profusely sweating. It's like, what is this?
That's like getting ready to go skiing.
Yeah. Do you ski?
I do. I went on a ski trip, not last week, but the week before and amazing snow. Cause
we got in and then there was a series of snow storms every other day was a snowstorm. So
we skied every other day after and got this nice, beautiful powder.
Nice. I snowboard, but I haven't done in a while, but I really enjoy it when I get to
do it.
I did snowboarding too. So I started with skis. Then I switched over to snowboarding
cause it was like the cool thing to do. I was a teenager at the time. I switched back
mainly because my kids are skiing now and it's way easier to be on skis to lift them
up if they fall.
That makes sense. My dad is a skier. When I saw like the options of like skiing or the
snowboarders like Sean White was really big when I was younger and like snowboarding was
like all the rage. I'm like, I'm trying to shred. I picked up snowboarding relatively
easily. I surfed and I skateboarded and long boarded and I feel like I'm kind of used to
boards. So I kind of picked it up quickly, which was nice.
I had a conversation about this with somebody about boards, board sports. Do they actually
transfer between them? Like I feel like surfing and skateboarding and snowboarding, even though
they're all boards and you're standing like the same way, don't seem like you could transfer
the same muscles.
It's a lot of balancing.
You don't use the same muscles.
There are a lot of aspects that don't transfer, but in terms of like, I need to balance, like
there are muscles like in your legs and back and stuff that you tune up for balancing better.
If you just kind of understand how your balance works a little bit, I think it's a little
bit easier. Snowboarding and skateboarding are a lot more similar than surfing. So not
one-to-one, but I feel like if you kind of are already a little bit comfortable on a
board, then you also don't have that fear aspect too of like, oh, what if I fall?
I still have that fear aspect.
Well, I do too sometimes.
Okay. Okay. So a snowboard, especially if the snow is powdery, I could fall on this
powdery snow. It just feels like falling on a cloud, but in a skateboard and falling on
cement, I feel like I can't do that.
I've broken my elbow doing that and busted things up. When I moved from North Carolina,
I broke my elbow or like, it was a bad fracture basically, because I was in a cast. So if
you're in a cast, I consider it broken basically. And I was about to move to Arizona. My parents
had to come down to help me move out because my arm was in a cast and I drove across the
country with one arm.
Oh my gosh. Wait, which arm was broken?
Left. My left arm.
Oh, are you right-handed?
I am right-handed.
Okay. I guess that's a little bit better.
It wasn't too bad, but I mean, driving across the country in a cast isn't fun. I got to
like the corner of Texas and El Paso and I was like, I'm done with the cast. I don't
care. Took it off. It wasn't like one of those ones that was wrapped in plaster and
stuff. It was like wrapped differently. And so I was able to take it off myself. I don't
even remember now.
Is it like not a hard cast?
It was hard, but it was like almost splinted or something. Now I don't really remember.
How did I get that off? I don't remember. I just know I got it off.
I thought you had a saw it off.
The hard plaster casts you do. I've been in plenty of those. It wasn't that, but it was
still wrapped though. It was something that I could take off though by myself. I don't
remember. Anyway, so we've been hinting at this for a while, but in February we're going
to be doing something fun. That was your idea, which I think is going to be a lot of fun
where we're kind of going to go through some of our favorite Ruby methods all month for
each episode, kind of focusing on a different type of object type. Did I explain that well?
Well, I came across this idea mainly because I had talked to Colin Jover about, hey, I
want to get better at trying to remember my Ruby methods and just being able to pull it
out of a bag more quickly. Because I feel like at work, I don't really get a chance
to do that. And so he suggested to do some codores. So I would try to do one per day.
And I really liked them. They were very bite-sized. I thought that it would be more like a leet
code type thing where those seemed more involved and they were more complex. And I had to learn
about all these data structures and algorithms. And I was like, I'm not interested in doing
that. But doing the kata every day helped me kind of build up my bag of methods and
figured we could chat about some of our favorite methods on the show.
Yeah. Let's do it. Hopefully we'll just stop and remember or figure out the method if we
don't explain it well. I often get mid explanation. I'm like, wait, I don't know as much about
this as I thought I did, but we're going to try. And we're going to start with my favorite
method, which is on the array object, which is map. You like to map Julie?
I do. Why do you like it?
I feel like I just use it a lot. So map is a method on array that basically returns a
new array if the conditions are met that you put inside of the block that map takes. And
you can use the block shorthand, which is like an ampersand colon or an ampersand symbol.
So like if you had a list of users and you wanted to get all their posts, you could say
users.map and colon posts. And that would return you that list, which you wouldn't need
to do an active record. But that's one way you could do that.
Typically you pass it a block and you do some sort of logical condition that's like, okay,
if the value is over one, add it to my new array. And that's a nice way to take a list
of data and convert it into a new list of data that you can then use wherever you want.
I do this a lot. I use map all the time. It has an alias called collect that I also like.
And I didn't realize collect was an alias for map for a little bit. So I was like using
collect all over the place. But yeah, I love a map. I love a good map.
So map iterates over an array and you pass it a block. If the conditions are met, it
kind of like shovels into some new array. Yes. And then map returns an array.
I really like the shorthand ampersand colon thing.
Yeah. That can be really nice just to shorten some code. If you have a conditional on your
method, let's say we had posts and we only wanted to get the ones that were archived.
So you can do post.map archived if that's a Boolean because that would evaluate to true
or false because basically whether or not the thing is added to the new array is whether
the conditional is true or not. And so archived would be a Boolean and that would be an easy
way to use that shorthand syntax.
But if you're doing some more complex logic, then you're probably not going to be able
to get away with that. Cool. Array flatten is another one I really like. So a lot of
times if you're using map, you might return several arrays and then store them in a big
array. So now you have an array filled with arrays. And what flatten does is it recursively
flattens every array inside of the object you're iterating over and returns just one
flat array. And there's actually a method called flat map, which will allow you to map,
but it will return everything flattened, which is like kind of shorthand. So a lot of times
you'll see people do like dot map, then dot flatten. Flat map is a way to skip over that.
But typically if you're wanting to put a list of things in a table or a list or something,
you're going to want a completely flat array. And so that's where flatten really kind of
comes in handy.
Does flatten work on nested arrays? So you might have like an array inside of an array
inside of an array and that'll still flatten it. Or does it just do one layer?
It should be recursive. And I think you can actually pass it level, I believe.
Oh, cool.
So yes, you can pass it a level. So if you don't call a level, it will recursively flatten
everything. So what you were saying, like if we have an array inside of an array inside
of an array, everything will be flat if you don't specify level. But if you have an array
with inside of an array inside of an array and you only pass it level zero, level zero
will take the array and flatten it. It doesn't look like it flattens it at all.
Like it just returns the same thing.
That's what it looks like. And then if you pass it one, it flattens one level deep. And
if you pass it two, it flattens two levels deep. If you pass it three, it flattens three
levels deep. So like on the Ruby docs, like they have a nested array inside an array inside
of an array. And when you pass it three, it flattens everything. You pass it zero, it
doesn't flatten anything.
Hi there. Julie here. I would like to take a moment to thank Go Rails for sponsoring
this episode. When I was first starting out, I struggled with finding up-to-date content
to help me level up. Then I learned about Go Rails. Not only does Go Rails provide new
screencasts weekly, they also have two fantastic instructors that break down complex topics
into digestible chunks. On top of that, I really appreciate when they explain the whys
behind the subject. One of my favorite walkthroughs is creating your first Ruby gem from scratch.
What a great way to learn by stripping down to just the basics. If you care about leveling
up as a Ruby engineer, you can't go wrong with Go Rails. Check it out at gorails.com.
Even passing in zero literally just returns the same array, which is very interesting.
That is something I noticed that when using methods, I have just pulled up the Ruby docs
because I think a lot of these methods, you can pass in blocks and you can pass in parameters.
And sometimes you don't know that you can do that until you open up the docs. And then
you realize, oh, these are these other cool things that I could do with it. Or sometimes
it returns something different that I didn't anticipate that it was returning.
Yeah. I had no idea you could pass level to flatten until just now. I'm not sure when
I would use that, but I'm sure it's handy in some cases. I don't know.
If you're listening and you happen to pass in a parameter to flatten, let us know. We'd
like to find out what the use case for this would be.
Yeah. So that's flatten and flatten app. A lovely combination.
Our next method is unique UNIQ, which returns a new array, but only the ones that are not
duplicated. So if you had an array of one, two, two, three, it'll just return one, two,
three.
Yep. And it retains the first occurrence, which can be important because I've seen places
where people are trying to iterate over authors. Let's say you have authors attached to posts
and maybe the author roles are different. And you want to list everyone who worked on
that post. Maybe you have an editor and their author, and maybe the editor was also a co-author.
So maybe the co-author, only one person edited it and you want to list all the authors. If
you're iterating over authors and you're adding unique on it, you're only going to get the
first two, even though if you're not specifying, if it's a role, you want to group by at that
point.
So I just wanted to call it that it is the first occurrence that gets retained because
I've seen people trip up on that before. Oh, I thought it would return this one, but why
is it uniking and returning this one instead? And it has to do with the order in the array.
I am going to be honest. I'm having trouble understanding your example. What is the problem
again?
So sometimes you have an array of items, let's say an array of objects, and there's actually
something on the object that differentiates it from the other, like a role. So if we had
a list of authors and they all have a role, if you want to make sure that no author is
duplicated, you would add unique, but that's going to leave off someone who has maybe two
different roles on that same record.
Okay.
So if you're entering authors while unique, it's going to return the first occurrence
of that person, not maybe the one with the second role on it. And it depends on how you
set it up. But I just wanted to call that out, that it does retain the first occurrence
because I have seen people trip on that.
Nice. Thanks for letting me know. And can you pass in a parameter or a block with this
one?
I have no idea. It looks like you can pass a block. With a block given, it calls the
block for each element, identifies using method equal, and removes the elements for which
the block returns duplicate values.
Wow.
So in their example, they're uniking on the size of an element. So they're calling array.unique
and they're passing it a block where it's element and then it turns element.size. In
that instance, the array they have is a, a, a, a, a, a, b, b, b, b, b. So when I am looking
at this, and if I call unique without passing it a block, it's going to return that same
array, right? Because every element is unique. It's a, a, a, a, a, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b,
b, b, b.
So if you pass it a block and say element.size, you're saying I want to return the unique
list where it's basing it off element.size. So when you do that, it returns a, a, a, a,
a, a, because the size of each of these strings is one, two, or three. And that's the unique
aspect.
So b doesn't get returned.
Right. Because it's taking the first occurrences.
Yeah. Okay. So if you did something like a.reverse.unique, then you would probably get the b's back
instead of the a's.
Correct.
Cool. Learned something new.
I felt like I knew that, but I haven't looked at that in a while. So that's how you would
use going back to my authors on the post example, you would unique on the role maybe. So you
want like unique person from each role to be displayed.
That is the great point.
Next one is shuffle, which returns a new array with the elements of self-shuffled self being
the array that this is called on. I don't use this a lot. I use this sometimes when
I do coding problems, but I don't usually use this in practice. And the only thing,
reason I could think of to use this in practice is if maybe a post has related posts and you
want to show those in a random order, most people would want to show them on the date
they're created or something. But if you want to show them in a random order, like, Hey,
you might like these posts. And then it just grabs a random order of posts and just displays
them.
But you can also pass random to it, which I did not know. And the optional random argument
will be used as a random number generator.
I might have to play around with that for a little bit. So the method that's after this
is sample on an array. And I actually did use shuffle and sample in practice. So what
sample is it returns a random element from the array. And you can also pass in an argument
to return however number that you want to get from this. Okay. So if I'm trying to get,
let's say an array of five things and I need a sample of two things from it, it's randomly
grabbing two things from it, right? I don't need to do shuffle dot sample.
Yes.
So I'm wondering if I did not do shuffle dot sample. And I think I just did sample, but
I think the original code might've been something like shuffle it and then grab me the first
two items or something like that. But in practice we have say assessments and we only want to
get a quiz of five things. Then we can call a sample of five on that. And then it'll randomly
return these five assessments. That way our learners can get like a different variety
of questions each time they do the quiz.
That makes a lot of sense. I've done a lot of online school. And so that maps perfectly
to what I understand. Sometimes you'll go through a lesson assessment and you answer
the questions and you write them all down and then you don't send it to anyone because
that would be cheating. But let's just say you come back to that assessment and it's
a completely different questions or it's a different order. And you're like, what happened
here? That's a great use case for that. Yeah. That's cool.
So moving on from sample and shuffle is count, which returns the count of specified elements.
And if you don't pass it a block or an argument, it will return the count of all elements.
So this is probably something a lot of people are familiar with. Maybe you're showing five
posts on a page and you're paginating that, but you want to show the user the count of
all posts, maybe at the top of the page.
Showing five out of a thousand posts..count might be a thing you use there. I mean, depending
on the pagination library, but removing that aspect..count would be a great way to do
that where you already have your list of objects and you can call.count and get the count
of them.
And the nice thing with an array is it's not going to make a SQL query if those objects
are already loaded into memory. So it's not using the SQL count. It's just counting the
elements in the array. Because there are some methods in ActiveRecord that use the SQL count,
like calling count in SQL to calculate how many records there are. But.count is an array
method and it should not do that.
Oh.
Count executes a count every time. So in ActiveRecord, it will, this is inappropriate in general,
it will only use count if you always want to execute a SQL count right now. So then
.size, dang, this got complicated. This is something I always have to go back and look
at because I'm like, one of them is performant. One of them is less performant, but is very
performant in certain circumstances. And one of them you just shouldn't use. But this is
the only with ActiveRecord,.count with just an array is not going to execute a SQL query.
But for an ActiveRecord relation,.count will execute a SQL query. And most Rails developers
should actually be using size in most places, I believe.
Yeah. So when you use size, you don't use the count query and it uses a select. Only
use count if you want to always execute a SQL count query. So I got that wrong.
The number one reason startups fail is that they run out of money. There are so many ways
for startups to lose money. Downtime should not be one. Recent studies found that downtime
can cost $427 per minute for small businesses and up to $9,000 per minute for medium sized
businesses. That's every single minute. A monthly subscription with Honey Badger helps
you prevent costly downtime by giving you all the monitoring you need in one easy to
use platform so you can quickly understand what's going on and how to fix it, which helps
you stay in business. Get started today in as little as five minutes at honeybadger.io
with plans starting at free. Yeah, you heard me, free. A big thank you to Honey Badger
for sponsoring this episode of Ruby for All.
When would you want to use a SQL count query versus not?
When none of the records are loaded in memory at all, maybe. I think in general, you don't
want to do it if you don't have to for an active record relation. I have relearned this
stuff several times and I always forget. There are several great articles out there. I'll
put one in the show notes and people can check it out.
And.length is not something that you would want to use either?
Not with active record. I think size is the one you want to use. If the relation is loaded,
that is the query that the relation describes has been executed and we've already stored
the result. So let's say you are getting a list of posts in your controller and you're
using a where statement. So you're saving that into a post instance variable, let's
say that's loaded into memory. You can now use length and that won't be bad because you've
already got the relation loaded. But if you were to use count, it's still going to execute
this SQL query. But length, if it's already loaded into memory, length, I don't think
will trigger the query.
Okay. So I think I learned to just use size and not worry about whether it's loaded or
not and trying to use length in those situations.
Yes. So I guess if they're not loaded, I think size might still trigger a SQL query, but
it's not going to run one as performance heavy as using length or count, I think. But you
can also use.load. So if you add like unread posts count, for instance, at the top of your
page, you could do messages.load.size and then that will be performant, more performant
than the others.
Cool.
We'll put an article list in the show notes. I'm basically reading like something from
Nate Berkepek. So we'll put a link to that in the show notes.
Awesome. Thank you, Nate.
Yes.
So our next method is min max. And I like this just because I was using it on a problem.
I don't know a use case for this, but what it does is it returns a two element array
containing the minimum and the maximum value.
I got a use case for you. Let's say you have a dashboard. It's like a trading dashboard
for some financial crap that I don't understand. And you want to show the trade that made you
the least money or that you lost the most money on and you want to show the trade that
has the best result. That could be a great use case for that.
That's a good one.
So if you use a block, it's two parameters. So it would be like min max and then the block
would be A and B. And then you could even use like the spaceship operator to say A dot
size spaceship B dot size. Please don't ask me to explain the spaceship.
You brought up spaceship operators.
Dammit.
I was going to say you brought up spaceship operators. So now you have to explain what
a spaceship operator is.
I truly cannot. Even if I tell you what it means, I still don't fully understand when
to use this one. But it sounds simple, but it's like in process, when do I use this?
So what it is, it compares two objects and returns one if the first object's value is
larger and zero if both values are equal and negative one if the second object's value
is larger. So the example is seven spaceship operator one, and that returns one because
the object on the left is greater than the one on the right. And you have one spaceship
operator one that returns zero because they're both equal. And if you have one spaceship
operator two, it returns negative one because the value on the right is larger than the
one on the left. You see why I didn't want to explain this? It's hard to explain this.
And why I will always look this up as well myself. I have not had to use the spaceship
operator in practice. Have you ever had to?
I've seen it used, but I've never written it. I understand it when I'm reading it, but
in practice it's like, okay, but I could just use like this other thing. Most of the time
there's another way to do it. And if your brain doesn't automatically know how the spaceship
operator works and you've not done it a ton, then you're probably going to lean for the
way you know how to do it.
Got it. That makes sense.
So array.select is our next one, which calls a block if given with each element of the
array and returns a new array containing those elements of the array for which the block
returns a truthy value. Does it return a new array? It does return an array.
Yes. I think it returns a new array, but it only returns the ones that satisfy the condition
that you gave it in the block.
Right. And if you don't pass a block, it returns an enumerator instead of an array.
You said it returns a what now?
Enumerator.
You might have to explain what an enumerator is now.
Oh no. That's what I get. An enumerator is a class which returns both internal and external
iteration. So most methods have two forms. A block form where the contents are evaluated
for each item in the enumeration and a non-block form which returns a new enumerator wrapping
the iteration. That's all I got.
Do you ever use select or similar methods and don't pass in a block?
No. Yeah. Because if I'm using a select, I'm trying to find something in the array typically
or some specific use case. So normally I'm using map, not select. But if I am using select,
I am always passing a block.
Do you always pass a block for map also?
Pretty much. I can't think of a time when I haven't. Fun fact, you added this fun fact.
Filter was not an alias before 2.5, it looks like.
I don't know which Ruby version, but so I was doing a code wars kata and I was trying
to use dot filter for something. I was trying to get back something that met some condition
and it was like a defined method filter, no method error. And I noticed that I was on
version 2.5. So in the kata, you can actually change the Ruby version to some of the problems
to 3.0 if they have it, but this particular one did not have it. So then I went into my
IRB and I was playing around with it and I realized that filter was not an alias until
sometime between 2.5 and 3.0.
Gotcha. I also remember the difference between a select and map. Select returns a new array
filtered by the condition in the block and map returns a new array built from the output
of the block. So like a map, you could pass an X as the block argument and do X plus one
and then your new array would be every value in your original array plus one. But select
is just going to do like a logical comparison and say like, I'd return everything where
X is greater than two. So it's not like changing the data in place.
For map, you will get back the same size array, but for select, you could get the same size
array only if all of the conditions were true.
Yeah. Yeah.
It's like for the map method, the array is going through a transformation and it's all
like the same, but all the values could be different. And then for select, some of them
didn't make the cut.
Right. Yeah. So you would use map if you wanted to change things inside of the array and select
if you just want to conditionally choose some of the elements in the array.
Cool. I thought it was kind of cool. We won't talk about these other methods, but these
aliases, for example, maps alias is collect and filter select. We also have inject, reject,
detect.
Yep. Inspect.
Oh, and inspect.
We're at the end of our array list for now.
But there is one that you missed that I kind of want to bring up. You missed any, and I
kind of like that one because you can do any, all, none. But basically you can pass the
any method and a block and it will return true if any one of the elements met that criteria.
You can also use any to figure out if there are any nil elements in the array. So like
if you had an array of nil and false, and a lot of times you'll use this where you're
like, okay, I don't want to render this list if something is nil inside of it.
Where if you wanted to ignore the fact that there's nil inside of it, you would use compact,
which is a method we didn't talk about, which basically just removes anything that's nil
inside of the array and returns that array without this nil items. So you would do like,
if it was nil and false.any, that's going to return false. But if it's nil zero and
false.any, that's going to return true. And if it's an empty array and you call.any, it
returns false. So nil and false will cause it to be false. But if there's at least one
true element, one true the element inside of the array, it will return true. Versus
.any, versus.all, which you talked about, which will return false if any element inside
of the arrays nil or false. You also pass it a block like you said. So like if you had
zero one two dot any, you pass it a block where element is greater than one, it would
return true. Because for that example, we're at zero one two, is there an element greater
than one in there? Yes, there is. So it evaluates it true.
So yeah, I think those are all of the methods that we liked and or use in practice.
Next week, we're going to look at hash. If we did not explain something well, or we missed
your favorite array method, let us know on Twitter, I guess would be the best place because
I do check the email. I'm not an emailer. So check us out. Let us know. I would be definitely
interested in that, especially for the things where we're like, I don't know when I would
use this. If you have a good example use case of what that is, let us know and we'll share
that. Yep. Much appreciated if you do.
Yeah. But I think that's it for this week. Julie, I'll catch you next week on the flip
side.
All right. See you next week. Bye everyone. Thanks for listening. Bye.